# Project Proposal
> Aneesha Nanda, Ansul Sinha, Juan Alvarez, Katie Goulding

## Final Project
This link will bring you to our final hosted project: https://katiegoulding.github.io/

## Project Description
### Purpose
> The overarching purpose of our research project is to look at what factors of a household can help predict the need of social welfare assistance. This is an important research question because social welfare programs can often be controversial when dealing with people living below the poverty line. Those who are living in some of the poorest conditions are often unable to provide the necessary income and expense records to be eligible for social welfare. Current methods for identifying where to provide aid and whether certain segments of the population are receiving enough aid rely on these factors leading to inaccurate assessments of social need. This research project focuses more on observable traits of a household and demographics of each household member to predict the level of need of a family. By conducting this research and developing a more accurate algorithm for providing social welfare based on visible features of a house, social welfare assistance can be more efficiently delivered and more highly utilized by those in need of it. 
	
### Problem Domain
> Little current research exists centered around the correlation of housing features and welfare assistance. In addition, there is little research that explores welfare particularly in Costa Rica. However, there are several studies that research factors and perspectives of social welfare across the United States, Canada, and Northern European countries. Given our broader problem domain is social welfare, the research we conducted focuses on the overall area of study.
Our research was focused on understanding factors that lead people to request social welfare. In the United States in 2012, 50% of people in female-householder families received government assistance, compared to the 14.7% of people in married couple households. 37.3% of people who did not graduate from high school compared to the 9.6% of people who completed at least one year of college were receiving government assistance. The most concerning percentage is the 41.6% of black people and the 36.4% of Hispanic people who participated in government assistance programs (United States Census Bureau). These numbers lead us to question the structural and institutional barriers that result in these demographics needing to request government assistance while other groups don’t need to request it.
Numerous studies suggest that areas with high ethnic diversity have a more difficult time sustaining strong social welfare programs (Kay, Johnston). For most researchers on this topic, the tension between immigration and support for social welfare represents the largest threat for mutual support of social welfare programs. Homogenous communities that have a shared sense of collective responsibility and values maintain solidarity on the topic of social welfare (Kay, Johnston). Kay and Johnston conclude that ethnic diversity does not actually pose as a significant enemy of the welfare state. With the way they measured trust, they concluded the impact of diversification on support for social welfare was conditional on the extent to which majorities and minorities overlap geographically. Kramon and Posner studied governmental ethnic favoritism within six African countries. They discovered that ethnic favoritism exists only for some outcomes (such as electricity and education), but not all. This paper concluded that groups of people who are demographically similar to the president and the group of people working alongside them experience favoritism for specific outcomes.
Differences in housing and living conditions among people are reflections of social inequity (Kramon, Posner). People living under the poverty line and in need of social welfare are most often people who face structural barriers. As we saw in the segregation dataset, it was evident that geographies and neighborhoods are separated along racial lines. Kramon and Posner state that “housing should not be the missing link between welfare and economic development” (80). Poor housing conditions are indicative of social exclusion and conflict.
While there is research examining various aspects of social welfare, our model will contribute a new perspective into the area of study. It is particularly unique as we explore social welfare in Costa Rica and will understand factors of a household correlate to receiving social welfare.

### Hypothesis
> The specific hypothesis we are testing through our statistical and machine learning models is the following: *Visible features of a house and demographics of household members can accurately assess the level of need a family has for social welfare assistance.*  

### Datasets
> The datasets we will be working with to answer our hypothesis are from Kaggle. Each dataset is already split up into train.csv file and a test.csv file. Within the files, there are 142 columns, each of which contains a feature regarding  the household. The features run from demographics about specific members in the household (e.g. number of people living in house, marital status, ages, relationships, etc.) to physical features about the house (e.g. material of the floor/ceiling, number of bathrooms, location, etc). Many of these features are binary variables that simply signify the presence or absence of the variable and are therefore coded into 0’s and 1’s. All of the data in these particular datasets are collected from a sample of households in Costa Rica, however many other countries face similar issues to identifying families in need of social welfare and could use similar predictors to better provide assistance. The “target” column in the training data represents the outcome we will be trying to predict with our model. The target outcome is categorized on a scale from 1 to 4 with 1 representing extreme poverty and 4 representing non vulnerable households (those that do not need assistance). Each row of the datasets represents a household and has been given a unique household identifier that can be utilized in creating household-wide features if we see fit. (Link to dataset: https://www.kaggle.com/c/costa-rican-household-poverty-prediction/data) 

### Statistical and Machine Learning Methods
> To reiterate, our hypothesis is: Visible features of a house and demographics of household members can accurately assess the level of need a family has for social welfare assistance.  
To begin with understanding our data, we will initially use the linear regression model; this is to better understand the univariate analysis - how each individual variable factors into the vulnerability level. We will then use forward selection to find the greatest variance in our multivariate analysis, and focus our dataset on the variables with the greatest correlation to higher vulnerabilities. We will use machine learning methods from scikit-learn for a grid search and cross-analysis validation to test our hypothesis. We would also like to create a learning curve, part of the validation curve, to understand how well our model does.

### Target Audience
> While this data can be used for many different purposes, we will be honing in on the government and social welfare programs (governmental provided assistance). By identifying where the most need for welfare is, we are assisting the government in focusing their programs on depth, rather than breadth, so those who are more vulnerable can access the resources they need. This information is vital for decision-making processes in order to prioritize vulnerable populations and the resources they need. In addition, the results of our project have the potential to highlight inequities across household demographics. This information will benefit the public and increase awareness of structural barriers.

### Audience Insights
> Understanding the correlation between living situations and vulnerability is crucial to know where to send aid; moreover, predicting which areas may need certain resources in advance would help the government create preventive measures. These preventive measures can also have greater economic impacts; if monetary resources are used wisely and where needed, the government will tackle the issue without waste; moreover, if used in a preventive sense, costs will be less and the issue will not worsen. Our data focuses on social welfare as a whole, though further analysis could include specific questions, such as where to focus educational programs, food stamp programs, garbage disposal aid, and more. The dataset includes information on overcrowdedness of both bathrooms and bedrooms, handicaps, number of tenants, age and gender of tenants, material the house was built by, water and electricity use, sewage use, house material on a linearity scale (dangerous to good), relationship status of tenants, education levels, and more. 
The questions asked can include, “How does household overcrowdedness relate to need of social welfare programs?”
Perhaps the technological items in the house provide insight to vulnerability, and a question could be: “To what degree are social welfare programs affected by technological items in the house?” 
To understand relationships between tenants and the need of social welfare, the data can explore: “How does divorce affect social welfare status?” and could even include information of whether there are children involved or not, for a multivariate analysis.
Overcrowdedness, technology (such as kitchen appliances) and divorce are three variables that can change frequently, unlike sewage disposal, which takes a longer time for change to be made; thus, the changeable variables will act as better predictor variables. 

## Technical Description
> To build our final resource, we will be utilizing Python and creating an HTML report with text and visuals, ensuring all code is hidden. In terms of new technical skills we may need to learn to complete the project, it might be necessary for us to explore other sklearn machine learning tools if we choose models that have not otherwise been taught in class. We may also need to learn how to use different data visualization packages (outside of Seaborn, Plotly, and others used in class) if they have properties that are more effective in displaying our data. These technical challenges should be easy enough to overcome by studying documentation online and doing background research to truly understand each model, library, or package we are using. 

> Looking at the dataset that we will be using, it seems like the biggest challenge we will face is dealing with categorical variables. Nearly all the variables as categorical data which is not something we have had much experience dealing with in class so far. Many of the variables are simply coded into binary 1s and 0s representing whether a certain factor was present or absent in a household. Imputing values for missing data (or deciding to drop values) will also prove to be a challenge. In addition, many of the variables in the dataset are very similar, only differentiating by small nuances. For example, there are thirteen variables solely referring to what the predominant material of a household’s floor is. Therefore, it will be difficult when referencing the data to make sure we are looking at the variable we are actually interested in trying to test how those nuances in very similar variables affect our model. 

> As previously stated, we will initially use a linear regression model to better understand the univariate analysis of some variables. This can show us how each individual variable factors into the vulnerability level. We will also need to plot out the distribution of some variables in our model in order to see how they are distributed: whether they follow a normal, negative binomial, or no significant distribution. Looking at the distribution of the target column, “Target”, can also help us decide on what statistical model to use if we choose to not use our machine learning approach. After deciding on what type of regression to use, we will use forward selection to determine what combinations of variables to incorporate in our model. After we have made our model, we will try to initiate a machine learning approach. Using a pipeline with multiple K nearest neighbors parameters and a grid search cross validation method, we could determine which parameters results in the best accuracy.  

> Our biggest challenges that we anticipate in terms of modeling and machine learning would be handling any missing data and deal with the large amount of columns. Since there is a large amount of categorical columns that have binary values, we cannot simply assume to place a 1 or 0 in the missing field. Determining and getting rid of insignificant columns will also be a challenge as many of them tie in to each other. The column names are also in Spanish and don’t provide valuable information to what exactly the column is tracking.  

## Citations
Kramon, E., & Posner, D. (2013). Who Benefits from Distributive Politics? How the Outcome One Studies Affects the Answer One Gets. Perspectives on Politics, 11(2), 461-474. doi:10.1017/S1537592713001035

Lane Kenworthy; Do Social-Welfare Policies Reduce Poverty? A Cross-National Assessment, Social Forces, Volume 77, Issue 3, 1 March 1999, Pages 1119–1139, https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/77.3.1119

Soroka, Stuart & Banting, Keith & Johnston, Richard. (2002). Ethnicity, Trust, and the Welfare State. Cultural Diversity versus Economic Solidarity. 

US Census Bureau. (2017, January 07). 21.3% of US Participates in Government Assistance Programs Each Month. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2015/cb15-97.html

VAN WEESEP, J. (2000). Housing policy - the link between welfare and economic development. Journal of Housing and the Built Environment, 15(2), 165-181. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/41107141


Dataset: Costa Rica poverty prediction
https://www.kaggle.com/c/costa-rican-household-poverty-prediction/data

Github Url:https://github.com/aneeshananda/info370-finalresource 
